---
layout: post
title:  "PubSub"
date:   2021-04-16 11:00:00 +0200
categories: architecture communication 
---

# Asynchronous communication
When creating a system, you always need to talk between different components. There are two different types of communication, asynchronous and synchronous and in most systems you will need to use both. In this post I will focus on asynchronous communication.

# When to use
Asynchronous communication is used when you don't want to have a direct response on a request. You want to call like this when you want to notify another component that a unit of work should start. One example of this could be that when the user put an order, the user should receive an confirmation email. To store an order and send an email are two different unit of works and should be separated to minimize the coupling as there is nothing to gain by coupling them together.

# Transport agnostic communication
When we communicate between different components we do not care codewise what medium for transportation we're using. If it's in-proc, RabbitMQ or even HTTP doesn't matter, our code should look the same. All we care about is that the transportation is fast and reliable. When the technology changes, as it always does, we do not want to change the whole application to support the new technology. We want to change one place where the call is happening and be fine with it. This also gives us the ability to run the application in different ways during development and testing where it could be benificial to keep the number of services running as low as possible to speed up the inner-loop and to save your precious RAM. By separating the pubsub from our code we also gain the advantage of being able to call it directly like any other method.


# Service proxy
To support this you need a service proxy that does the communication for you whether it's over the wire or in-process. When you then have a single point where all the communication goes through, you have a perfect place where you can add logging, timing, exception handling and everthing else that you expect to have when communicating with other components.

# Implementation
I have started to build a [small library](https://github.com/lullen/service-proxy) that supports this idea, while not completed it is functional enough to show how it could look like.

First we define an interface and tag it with the ExposedService attribute. The methods should be tagged @Subscriber(topic = "[TopicName]") should only have one parameter and it should be an object. The return value should be of type `Response<T>`. What the `Response<T>` does is to give you a way handle exceptions and errors in a uniform way and gives you the opportunity to join calls. Both the parameter and return value must be ProtoBuf objects, this is a small code-smell that could be fixed in a future version. At the moment I have focused on getting the service proxy to work with [Dapr](https://dapr.io) and in-process but could easily be extended to support RabbitMQ without Dapr.

{% highlight java %}
@ExposedService
public interface Hello {
    @Subscriber(topic = "hello")
    Response hello(HelloRequest request);
}
{% endhighlight %}

Then we should add an implementation to the interface, exactly as you would do with any other interface. 

{% highlight java %}
public class HelloServiceImpl implements Hello {
    public Response hello(HelloRequest request) {
        var text = String.format("Hello there {}.", request.getName());
        var response = HelloResponse.newBuilder().setText(text).build();
        System.out.println(text);
        return new Response();
    }
}
{% endhighlight %}

To configure the server, this is what is currently needed.

{% highlight java %}
public static void main(String[] args) throws IOException, InterruptedException {
    var injector = Guice.createInjector(new DaprModule(), new ProxyModule());
    
    // Set service proxy in Dapr mode
    ServiceProxy.init(ProxyType.Dapr, injector);

    final var service = injector.getInstance(DaprServer.class);
    
    // Start server on port 5000
    service.start(5000);
    
    // Register all interfaces that you want to expose
    service.registerServices(List.of(Hello.class));
    // Register all the subscribers with the pubsub component named pubsub.
    // When using dapr this name is the component name for pubsub 
    service.registerSubscribers("pubsub");
    service.awaitTermination();
}

// Guice module
public class DaprModule extends AbstractModule {
    @Override
    protected void configure() {
        bind(Hello.class).to(HelloServiceImpl.class);
        bind(DaprServer.class);
    }
}
{% endhighlight %}


To configure the client to use the proxy, this is what is currently needed.

{% highlight java %}
public static void main(String[] args) throws Exception {
    var injector = Guice.createInjector(new ProxyModule());
    ServiceProxy.init(ProxyType.Dapr, injector);
    // Init the pubsub component named pubsub.
    // When using dapr this name is the component name for pubsub 
    EventPublisher.init("pubsub");

    new TestClient().hello("Ludwig");
}
{% endhighlight %}

Now that it is implemented we can finally call it using the code below and as you can see there are no references to HTTP, gRPC or something similar. If something returns an error or exception the next then() won't be called and instead the onError method will be called with a status code and an error message. You do not need to have the onError method to catch the exception as it's done lower in code and you never need to surround the service calls with a try/catch. 

{% highlight java %}
public class TestClient {
    public void hello(String name) {
        var service = ServiceProxy.create(Hello.class);
        var request = HelloRequest.newBuilder().setName(name).build();
        EventPublisher.publish("hello", request);
    }
}
{% endhighlight %}

# In-proccess

If you instead want to communicate in-process all you need to do is to change the configuration. The application that you start should reference the client and the server and it's main method should look something like.

{% highlight java %}
public static void main(String[] args) throws Exception {
    var injector = Guice.createInjector(new ProxyModule(), new DaprModule());

    // Set service proxy in in-proc mode
    ServiceProxy.init(ProxyType.InProc, injector);
    
    // Init the pubsub component named pubsub.
    // When using in-proc, this name doesn't matter.
    EventPublisher.init("pubsub");

    // Initialize the service loader so the proxy knows how to instantiate the services.  
    ServiceLoader.init(injector);
    ServiceLoader.registerServices(List.of(Hello.class));
    ServiceLoader.registerSubscribers("pubsub");

    var text = new TestClient().hello("Ludwig");
    System.out.println(text);
}
{% endhighlight %}

# Future enhancements
In the future I want to make it easier to configure the services. Today you need to specify which interfaces you want to host, that should of course be done automatically. I want to be able to switch between different DI containers more easily and lastly I want support more transportation mediums. 